---
title: 数逻
date: 2023-02-27 09:54:53
tags: note
katex: true
---


# 数逻

## Introduction

## Boolean Algebra



### The Number System


#### BCD

BCD (Binary-Coded Decimal)

Classic method: 8421BCD.

add calculation:

the problem of carry:

$$
(14)_D+(28)_D=(0001\ 0100)_{BCD} + (0100\ 0100)_{BCD}\\
=(0101\ 1100)_{BCD}=(0110\ 0010)_{BCD}
$$

#### Gray Code

used in logic simplification and signal transmission.

every time a single bit is changed.

#### Floating poing Number

#### Negative numbers

**Complement Numeric System**

1's Complement: $N_{1's} + (-N)_{1's} = (111...)_{1's}$, or just inverting every bit of N. Low space efficiency and difficult to compute.

2's Complement: $N_{2's} + (-N)_{2's} = (000...)_{2's}$, or just inverting every bit of N and plus 1. A shift on 1's Complement.

MSB=Most significant bit, LSB=Least significant bit.

$$
-N=N_{us}-2^n=\sum_{i=0}^{n-1}k_i2^i-2^n=-k_{n-1}2^{n-1}+k_{n-2}2^{n-2}+\dots k_02^0
$$

So just set the weight of MSB to $-2^{n-1}$.


we ignore the bit beyond the range to make sure the answer is correct.
$$
(101)_{2's}+(001)_{2's}=(110)_{2's}\\
(011)_{2's}-(001)_{2's}=(011)_{2's}+(111)_{2's}=(010)_{2's}
$$
To detect an overflow, we can notice if 2 positive numbers add up to a negative numbers or 2 negative numbers add up to a positive numbers.

We can fix overflow by adding 0 as MSB if the answer should be positive and adding 1 as MSB if the answer should be negative.
### Boolean expression

#### Definition

$$
+(\text{OR/logic add}),\cdot (\text{AND/logic multiply}), \prime(\bar{})(\text{NOT/logit NOT})
$$

#### Boolean function

**Duality**

AND<->OR, 0<->1, variables unchanged.

$$
F_1=F_2\Leftrightarrow F_1^D=F_2^D
$$

**De Morgan's Law**

AND<->OR, 0<->1, **X<->X'**

**Useful Theorem**

X(Y+Z)=XY+XZ

XY+Z=(X+Z)(Y+Z)

X+XY=X

X(X+Y)=X



### Boolean function simplification


#### 2-level logic

**Standard form**
SOP and POS

Sum of Products or Products of Sum

**Min-term**
A min-term is a product of all variables taken either in the direct or complemented form, each variable shown once.

$A'B'C'=m_0$ and $ABC=M_7$

**Max-term** A max-term is a sum of all variables taken either in the direct or complemented form, each variable shown once.

$A+B+C=M_0$ and $A'+B'+C'=M_7$

$$
m_6= \overline{M_6}
$$

**Karnaugh Maps**

Use row and columns to represent combinations of the inputs(by min-terms), the cell to represent the value. The inputs is ordered by the sequence of Grey Code.

#### Simplification of 2-level logic

**Karnaugh Maps method**

If two adjacent min-terms deliver logic 1, merge them.

**Implicant**

$$
G\Rightarrow F, \text{then }G\text{ is the implicant of }F\\
no\ Q\ s.t.P\Rightarrow Q\Rightarrow F, \text{then }P \text{ is the prime implicant of }F\\
\text{If one min-term can only be covered by one prime implicant, this prime implicant is an EPI.}
$$

EPI will finally exist there.

**Q-M method**

algorithm to simplify multiple-input large-scale function.